Now, with fragments and portals,
we had two cool features
that help us write cleaner HTML code.
The app worked in exactly the same way
before we added those features too
but with those features,
we end up with semantically more correct HTML code
and that's never a bad thing.
It makes your app more accessible,
makes sure you don't render unnecessarily many divs
and in general, shows that you are a developer
who knows what he's doing.
Now let me move on to one last key feature,
which I also wanna show you,
which does something different
than fragments and portals though.
And that would be refs.
References but the name in React is just ref,
so the short form of reference.
What do refs do?
Refs are actually quite powerful
as we will see throughout the course
but in their most basic form,
they allow us to get access to other DOM elements
and work with them.
Now, what do I mean with that?
Let's go to the AddUser component again.
There we have our inputs
and we manage what the user enters
by simply keeping track of it.
We simply have our state
and with every keystroke,
we update our state.
So with every keystroke, we update the value we get
by the user and we store it in our state
and we feed that state back into the input
and we then use that state later on
to reset the inputs but also to send it
to the place where we need the data.
So that is a perfectly fine way of managing this.
But updating the state with every keystroke
when we only need it when we submit the form
sounds a bit redundant to me.
And that's a scenario where refs could help us,
though they're not limited to that.
I will already say that.
How do refs work?
With refs, we can set up a connection
between a HTML element which is being rendered in the end
and our other JavaScript code.
And for that, we first of all, need to create a ref,
which we do with the help of another React hook.
We use the useRef hook here
and we then simply call useRef here in our code,
in our functional component.
And like all React hooks, useRef is only usable
inside of functional components.
Now, what does useRef return
and which value does it take?
It takes a default value you wanna initialize it to
but we don't need this here
but I'm very interested in what it returns
because it returns a value
which allows us to work with that ref later,
so which allows us to work with that element
to which we're going to connect it.
And therefore, here I'll name this nameInputRef
because I plan on connecting this ref
with that first input,
which allows us to enter a username.
So here we have the nameInputRef.
Now I'll duplicate this and create another ref
by calling useRef again
and that will be my ageInputRef.
So now I've got two refs
and they're just sitting there doing nothing.
They're initialized to be undefined
because that's the default
and they're useless.
Now, we can let React know
that we wanna connect a ref
to a HTML element by going to that element
to which we wanna connect the ref
and adding a special prop there, the ref prop.
Just like the key prop, that's a built-in prop,
which you can add to any HTML element
because, and that's important,
you can connect any HTML element to one of your references.
You will very often do that for inputs
because you wanna fetch input data, for example,
but you can do with any element.
So here I've got my ref
and now I will pass nameInputRef as a value here.
And nameInputRef is just that constant,
which stores this first ref.
So with that, I'm connecting this ref,
which I created in this component
with that JSX code that is rendered
by that same component.
And now a connection will be established.
The first time React reaches this code
and renders this code,
it will actually set the values stored
in nameInputRef to the native DOM element
that is rendered based on this input.
And that's important.
What will end up inside of nameInputRef in the end
will really be a real DOM element later.
So let's do the same for the age
and here I'll connect this to ageInputRef
and that's now connected as well.
So now the refs are connected.
What's the benefit?
Let's go to our addUserHandler function
and after event.preventDefault,
I wanna console.log my refs.
Let's start with the nameInputRef.
If I log this here and I go back
and I go to the console
so that I can see the log,
if I submit this,
you see there's an object being output here.
There is a object being output here
and that object has a current property.
Now, that's important.
This ref value, which is being generated here
always is an object,
which always has a current prop
and the current prop holds the actual value
that ref is connected with.
Now, by default, it's undefined
but as soon as this code ran,
because of this ref prop,
the nameInputRef is connected to that input
and hence, it's actually the input
which is being stored as a value in the current prop.
And what's being stored here really
is the actual DOM node.
So not some theoretical value or anything like that
but the real DOM node,
which you could now manipulate
and do all kinds of things with.
Now, it is recommended that you don't manipulate it.
Your DOM should really only be manipulated by React.
You're using React to let it do all the heavy lifting
but reading data from the input doesn't sound too bad
because you're not changing anything with that.
You're just reading data.
So here instead of logging this here,
we can, of course, read current.value.
Now, current refers to the value stored
and the value stored is the input element
and every input element has a value property in JavaScript.
We can actually see this here.
There's the value property.
So if I now save this
and I log this value, if I enter Max here,
you see MAX being logged here.
And that's pretty cool
because that means we can get access
to the values stored in the element
without having to log every keystroke.
We don't need state for this.
We can just read it when the submit button is pressed.
So that means we could now replace console.log
maybe with a helper constant,
which we use inside of addUserHandler.
I'll name that constant enteredName
and simply store my current.value in that.
And I do the same for the age.
I add my enteredAge and store ageInputRef.current.value.
Now, enteredAge clashes with my state here,
so therefore, I'll pick a slightly different name,
I'll use enteredUserAge here.
Now we can check enteredName here
and enteredUserAge here
and also enteredUserAge here in this condition.
So always the values we retrieved from the refs.
And I also use enteredName here
and enteredUserAge to submit it to onAddUser.
Now, with that, of course,
we should no longer reset these inputs
by resetting the state here though
because we're not using the state
to get our values anymore.
We currently still have those listeners
but we actually now don't really need those values anymore.
We're using refs to get the values.
So what we could do
is we could get rid of these states here.
So of these states where we listen to every keystroke.
Therefore, get rid of these state updating functions
and get rid of these two handlers.
And also, get rid of the value property
and the onChange property on the inputs.
With that, we shortened that code quite a bit
and we're relying on refs to read the values.
Hence if I add Max, 31,
you see we still can add that user.
However, during the process,
we lost our resetting logic.
Now, to bring it back, we've got two options.
We can switch back to the state-based solution,
which is not bad but I wanna show refs here.
Or we do something which you should rarely do
but which actually is okay here
in the context of a input field value
which you wanna reset.
You can manipulate the DOM without React
and yes, I said you shouldn't do that
and you typically shouldn't do that
but if you just wanna reset the value entered by a user,
it is something you can consider doing.
So we could use the nameInputRef.current.value
and now set it to an empty string
and repeat this for the ageInputRef.
And with these two lines added here,
if we now check this again,
you see now it's cleared.
Again, rarely do that.
Rarely use refs to manipulate the DOM.
Here we're not really manipulating the DOM,
we're not adding a new element
or changing a CSS class,
I'm just changing what the user entered.
You could argue that you don't even wanna do that
and in that case, you can always return back
to the state-based solution
but I think it's fine.
Now, in general, the question is not whether refs
or state is better.
You can use either of the two.
You will sometimes have use cases
where you just want to quickly read a value, for example.
And if you only want to read a value
and you never plan on changing anything,
well, then you don't really need state
because just to use state as a keylogger
is not that great.
It's a lot of unnecessary code and work.
So if you just want to read a value,
refs are probably better.
In scenarios like this, it's up to you what you prefer.
Refs, which are a little bit less code
but you have this edge case of manipulating the DOM,
or a state, which is definitely cleaner
but is a bit more code.
It's up to you but we will see refs throughout this course
and you will see them in a lot of projects,
in a lot of React projects
because getting access to elements is quite convenient
and as I said, they can even do a bit more than that
but we'll see them again throughout the course.
This is just an introduction
and this is all you need to know about refs right now.